Elements of story-telling


I'll be reporting on an "investigation of a systemic failure in a graph of blue hues".

1) Context / definitions

To describe a systemic failure, we need a system. As a broad starting point, a "system" is a group of elements organised into a cooperative manner.

Some examples of systems are:
* natural: the brain, immune systems, beehives, ecosystems, ..
* designed: cities, electricity grids, the Internet, gardens .. 

Complex adaptive systems:
Source: http://www.slideshare.net/jurgenappelo/complexity-thinking (slide 42)


A systemic failure, also known as cascading failure, results from an initially small problem within the system that propagates and preventes the system normal functioning and its ability to recover. The imagery associated with a systemic failure is that of cascading dominoes, or of the "butterfly effect".

A couple of examples of systemic failures:
- finance and interconnection of institutions: in finance, the collapse of a financial institution can plundge other institutions (and even whole economies) into a collapsing spiral.
- in an ecosystems, the extinction of a key species can lead to the extinction of a significant part of this ecosystem.
- in agriculture, mono-culture systems relying on chemical pesticides can be annihilated by the emergence of a pest resistant to pesticides.



The systemic failure we'll consider now is the electricity blackout that happened in North America in 2003.

The system "electric grid" is composed of poles, wires, generators, operators, utilities, consumers, control processes, procedures and regulatory artefacts. It's widely acknowledged that the North American grid is one of the most complex system ever designed by humans.

I'd like to attract your attention on detecting on actions or system modifications that could have prevented the sequence of events I am about to describe. The game is "how do you design a system that minimises the risk of systemic failure?" 


2) Investigation => start the animation here

August 14, 2003

Lead up
-------

2:02 p.m. A transmission line in northeast Ohio fails due to contact with a tree.

2:14 p.m. An alarm system fails at the utility control room and is not repaired.

3:05 p.m. A transmission line sags into a tree and trips.

3:17 p.m. Voltage dips temporarily on the Ohio portion of the grid. Controllers take no action.

3:32 p.m. Power shifted by the first failure onto another power line, and causes it to sag into a tree, bringing it offline as well. While the controllers concentrate on understanding the failures, they fail to inform system controllers in nearby states.

3:41 p.m. A circuit breaker connecting 2 utility grids is tripped as 2 lines fail in rapid succession in northern Ohio.

4:09:02 p.m. Ohio draws 2 GW of power from Michigan, creating simultaneous undervoltage and overcurrent conditions as power attempts to flow in such a way as to rebalance the system's voltage.

4:10:34 p.m. Suddenly bereft of demand, power stations go offline, creating a huge power deficit. In seconds, power surges in from the east, overloading east-coast power plants whose generators go offline as a protective measure; the blackout is on.


Chain of event from the initial blackout
----------------------------------------

3 seconds later:
The eastern and western Michigan power grids disconnect from each other.

1 second later:
Cleveland separates from the Pennsylvania grid.

5 seconds later:
International connections between the United States and Canada start to fail.

2 seconds later:
Northwestern Ontario separates from the east and Ontario power plants go offline in response to the unstable voltage and current demand on the system.

1 second later:
New York separates from the New England grid.

4 seconds later:
Ontario separates from the western New York grid.

2 minutes later:
Northern New Jersey separates its power-grids from New York and the Philadelphia area, causing a cascade of failing power plants along the coast and throughout the inland regions west.

2 seconds later:
At 4:13 p.m, it's the end of cascading failure. 256 power plants are off-line, 85% of which went offline after the grid separations occurred, most due to automatic protective controls.


Effects and consequences
------------------------

- 55 million people affected in 8 states over 2 countries
- infrastructure systems affected:
* water supply
* industry
* transportation
All subways and all trains in and out of NYC were stopped. An "all-diesel" barebone service was restored the day after. Passenger screening at regional airports ceased, so these airports were shut down too. In New York, flight operations were further delayed because of difficulties with the e-ticketing system. 
Only one airport wasn't affected in the region - a former military base, it had its own generators.
Air Canada flights remained grounded for an additional day due to improper power supply to its control towers.

Many gas stations were unable to pump fuel. This compounded traffic problems as users drove their car until they ran out of petrol on the highway. Price at fuel stations sky-rocketted. Some oil refineries on the East Coast shut down, and resume operations slowly. This drove fuel prices up, and lead authorities to consider gasoline rationing.

The border crossing near Detroit had a 7-hour wait due to the unavailability of the electronic border check systems.

* communication
Cell phone communication were disrupted, especially after mobile phone towers backup power ran out of fuel. Wired phone lines continued to work. New Yorkers were lining up 10 deep or more at pay phones. Radio stations were knocked off air, but were quickly back on air with backup power. Internet access was unavailable, except for dial-up access modem from laptop computers (until their battery ran out of charge). Amateur radio operators were able to pass emergency communications during the blackout.


4) Discussion:
=> what do we get out of these discussions? is the subject material interesting / engaging enough?
The idea that one can get examples from one's understanding / observation of the world, and that nature and man-made systems have characteristics that help understand each other.


- systems/infrastructure interdependency and failure propagating between systems: 
* water / power nexus,
Desalination plant requires a large amount of power to function.
Coal power plants require large amounts of water, and protection from bushfires.
* petrol / food nexus,
Not difficult to see that there will be food shortages if petrol becomes an issue, as our supply chain are petrol-reliant.
* communications negative feedback loop
Communication prevented have led to additional accidents.

* It's not about being doom-minded or pessimistic, but to understand the levels of risks of our systems, make better decisions and build better systems tomorrow

- qualities of systems that are resistant / resilient to systemic failures
=> distribution (geographic spread), decentralisation (of power/decision-making), (bio)diversity, redundancy (no one function is carried by a single node) - no single point of failure, simplicity / DIY (food systems)


Wrap-up: pointers for further research
--------------------------------------

Notion of science branches involved: 
complexity science, based on systems theory, social networks, artificial life, evolutionary biology, artificial intelligence, evolutionary bilogy, information theory, computational theory, biological emergence ...

6 defining notions in complexity theory/science:
- sensitivity to initial conditions (butterfly effect)
- strange attractors (unpredictability)
- self-similarity (fractals)
- self-organisation (distributed control)
- the edge of chaos (emergence)
- fitness landscapes (continuous improvement)
Source: Michael C. Jackson, System Thinking: Creative Holims for Managers
via http://www.slideshare.net/jurgenappelo/complexity-thinking (slide 45)

Complexity theory: it's about the dynamics of change in a system
Source: http://www.slideshare.net/jurgenappelo/complexity-thinking (slide 51)

The activity of abstracting is basically a form of interaction between people in which they simplify the complexity of their own ordinary, everyday interactions in an effort to make meaning out of what they are doing. Ralph Stacey
Source: http://www.slideshare.net/jurgenappelo/complexity-thinking (slide 15)
